---
title: "Blind 75.12 - Number of 1 Bits"
header:
  teaser: "/assets/images/blind.png"
  og_image: "/assets/images/blind.png"
categories: 
  - Blind 75
tags:
  - blind 75
  - software
---

Number of 1 bits.

## Problem description

[Taken directly from LeetCode.](https://leetcode.com/problems/number-of-1-bits/description/)

Write a function that takes the binary representation of an unsigned integer and returns the number of '1' bits it has (also known as the [Hamming weight](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hamming_weight)).

**Note:**

*   Note that in some languages, such as Java, there is no unsigned integer type. In this case, the input will be given as a signed integer type. It should not affect your implementation, as the integer's internal binary representation is the same, whether it is signed or unsigned.
*   In Java, the compiler represents the signed integers using [2's complement notation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Two%27s_complement). Therefore, in **Example 3**, the input represents the signed integer. `-3`.

**Example 1:**

**Input:** n = 00000000000000000000000000001011 \
**Output:** 3 \
**Explanation:** The input binary string **00000000000000000000000000001011** has a total of three '1' bits.

**Example 2:**

**Input:** n = 00000000000000000000000010000000 \
**Output:** 1 \
**Explanation:** The input binary string **00000000000000000000000010000000** has a total of one '1' bit.

**Example 3:**

**Input:** n = 11111111111111111111111111111101 \
**Output:** 31 \
**Explanation:** The input binary string **11111111111111111111111111111101** has a total of thirty one '1' bits.

**Constraints:**

*   The input must be a **binary string** of length `32`.

**Follow up:** If this function is called many times, how would you optimize it?

## Solution type

Doesn't fit a category, just requires some thinking about what bit operations to use + how binary numbers work.

## Solution

The easy solution is to repeatedly check the LSB and right shift until `n` goes to 0. I know there's a nicer solution, so I'm going to try and think about that one...

Alright, nice and quick.

```c++
int hammingWeight(uint32_t n) {
    int weight = 0;
    while (n != 0) {
        n = n & (n - 1);
        weight++;
    }
    return weight;
}
```

The question I initially asked myself was "how can I move each 1 to the LSB every iteration?", but the actual question to answer is even simpler: "how can I remove (zero out) the least significant bit that is set to 1 on each iteration?". Consider the least significant bit that is set to 1 in an arbitrary-width integer:

`0b...1000`

We don't care what the prefix is; we just want a way to set that 1 to a 0. To set something to zero, you probably want to use bitwise AND. We want to do a bitwise AND on this number using a second number that *preserves the prefix* but zeros out the rest. This would work great:

`0b...0011`

or 

`0b...0001`

It just matters that we can consistently generate that second number and that it zeros out the 1. The way to do it ends up being to AND with `n - 1`, which in this scenario is

`0b...0111`

and after the bitwise AND results in

`0b...0000`.

`n - 1` is the only number you can bitwise AND `n` with that consistently preserves the prefix to the least significant 1. If you aren't convinced, try writing out `n` and `n - 1` for a few different values of `n` in binary. 

The number of 1s in the number is the same as the number of times we can perform this operation before reducing the value of `n` to 0. This results in a quick and easy solution that depends on the number of 1s instead of the width of the number. Take that, Python!.

I did remember there was some way to use `n - 1` here, so this isn't a spark of genius by any means; it's me coming back to problems that I've trained on before.
