---
title: "Blind 75.02 - Best Time to Buy and Sell Stock"
header:
  teaser: "/assets/images/blind.png"
  og_image: "/assets/images/blind.png"
categories: 
  - Blind 75
tags:
  - blind 75
  - software
---

Best time to buy and sell stock.

## Problem description

[Taken directly from LeetCode.](https://leetcode.com/problems/best-time-to-buy-and-sell-stock/)

You are given an array `prices` where `prices[i]` is the price of a given stock on the `ith` day.

You want to maximize your profit by choosing a **single day** to buy one stock and choosing a **different day in the future** to sell that stock.

Return _the maximum profit you can achieve from this transaction_. If you cannot achieve any profit, return `0`.

**Example 1:**

**Input:** prices = \[7,1,5,3,6,4\] \
**Output:** 5 \
**Explanation:** Buy on day 2 (price = 1) and sell on day 5 (price = 6), profit = 6-1 = 5. 
Note that buying on day 2 and selling on day 1 is not allowed because you must buy before you sell.

**Example 2:**

**Input:** prices = \[7,6,4,3,1\] \
**Output:** 0 \
**Explanation:** In this case, no transactions are done and the max profit = 0.

**Constraints:**

*   `1 <= prices.length <=` $$10^5$$
*   `0 <= prices[i] <=` $$10^4$$

## Solution type

Caching. Maybe counts as greedy too? But it's not really a greedy algorithm so much as "you're supposed to maximize this one value".

## Solution

I think I've done this one a few times before, although it takes me a bit to remember the logic behind the optimal solution. Took <5 minutes.

```c++
int maxProfit(vector<int>& prices) {
    int minSoFar = prices[0], bestProfit = 0;
    for (int currentPrice : prices) {
        minSoFar = currentPrice < minSoFar ? currentPrice : minSoFar;
        bestProfit = currentPrice - minSoFar > bestProfit ? currentPrice - minSoFar : bestProfit; 
    }
    return bestProfit;
}
```

$$O(n)$$ time, $$O(1)$$ space.

This is how I view it: if I'm selling on day *i*, what would have been the best price to buy the stock? The answer is: the minimum price in the first *i* days that came before the *i*th day. My goal is to answer this question for every day represented in the data, then pick the maximum profit from all of those days. To me, this intuitively becomes a one-pass for loop where I'm doing the same sequence of operations on each element.

Like with two sum, you can do an $$O(n^2)$$ loop that checks every element that came before the current element, and you can compute $$O(n)$$ possible profits for the current selling price. Basically, do an $$O(n)$$ operation $$O(n)$$ times. But buying cheaper is always the better option, so you only need to cache the minimum to get the optimal solution. This makes it an $$O(1)$$ operation $$O(n)$$ times. Keeping a `minSoFar` variable up to date nets you an $$O(n)$$ time solution in $$O(1)$$ space.

I guess you can cache the `maxSoFar` and skip selling that are greater than `minSoFar` but less than the highest selling price you've seen since `minSoFar`; however, I think that makes the code a lot more confusing without improving time complexity. Heck, it might be slower - you need to check another conditional every time, and if you meet the condition then you only skip one arithmetic computation.

Yes, I abuse ternary operators in interview problems. It's just faster. Hehehe.
