---
title: "Blind 75.17 - Coin Change"
header:
  teaser: "/assets/images/blind.png"
  og_image: "/assets/images/blind.png"
categories: 
  - Blind 75
tags:
  - blind 75
  - software
---

Coin change.

## Problem description

[Taken directly from LeetCode.](https://leetcode.com/problems/coin-change/)

You are given an integer array `coins` representing coins of different denominations and an integer `amount` representing a total amount of money.

Return _the fewest number of coins that you need to make up that amount_. If that amount of money cannot be made up by any combination of the coins, return `-1`.

You may assume that you have an infinite number of each kind of coin.

**Example 1:**

**Input:** coins = \[1,2,5\], amount = 11 \
**Output:** 3 \
**Explanation:** 11 = 5 + 5 + 1

**Example 2:**

**Input:** coins = \[2\], amount = 3 \
**Output:** -1

**Example 3:**

**Input:** coins = \[1\], amount = 0 \
**Output:** 0

**Constraints:**

*   `1 <= coins.length <= 12`
*   `1 <= coins[i] <= 231 - 1`
*   `0 <= amount <= 104`

## Solution type

Caching, DP flavor.

## Solution

```python
def coinChange(self, coins: List[int], amount: int) -> int:
    memo = [sys.maxsize] * (amount + 1)
    memo[0] = 0
    for i in range(1, amount + 1):
        for coin in coins:
            if coin <= i and memo[i - coin] != sys.maxsize:
                memo[i] = min(memo[i], memo[i - coin] + 1)
    return memo[amount] if memo[amount] != sys.maxsize else -1
```

The recurrence relation is $$c(i)_{\textrm{best}} = \[ \textrm{min}_{c'} {c(i - c')}_{\textrm{best}} \]$$ where $$c(i)$$ is the minimum coin change at position $$i$$ and $$c'$$ represents a given coin out of all the possible coins in `coins`. Your base case is that there are 0 ways to get an amount of 0 with any given set of coins, as per the example. (Sometimes it makes more sense to say there is 1 way to get that amount - which is to say, do nothing - but for some reason it works here. I'm doing this a bit late at night so I couldn't tell you why tbh, this does happen though and it comes down to subleties in the problem semantics.)

Once this is figured out, the rest is just coding; I think the only interesting thing is that I initialized all values to some MAX variable to simplify the logic in the for loop; this requires an if-else at the return statement so that you correctly return -1 instead of MAX if a coin cannot be formed. A nice refreshing DP problem.
