---
title: "Blind 75.03 - Contains Duplicate"
header:
  teaser: "/assets/images/blind.png"
  og_image: "/assets/images/blind.png"
categories: 
  - Blind 75
tags:
  - blind 75
  - software
---

Contains Duplicate.

## Problem description

[Taken directly from LeetCode.](https://leetcode.com/problems/contains-duplicate/description/)

Given an integer array `nums`, return `true` if any value appears **at least twice** in the array, and return `false` if every element is distinct.

**Example 1:**

**Input:** nums = \[1,2,3,1\] \
**Output:** true

**Example 2:**

**Input:** nums = \[1,2,3,4\] \
**Output:** false

**Example 3:**

**Input:** nums = \[1,1,1,3,3,4,3,2,4,2\] \
**Output:** true

**Constraints:**

*   `1 <= nums.length <=` $$10^5$$
*   $$-10^9$$ `<= nums[i] <=` $$10^9$$

## Solution type

Hashing

## Solution

The best time complexity possible is $$O(n)$$, since you need to traverse the entire input array to check whether any one element is a duplicate of another. Hashing gives us a very short solution:

```python
  def containsDuplicate(self, nums: List[int]) -> bool:
      return len(nums) != len(set(nums))
```

Unordered sets[^0] use hashing, meaning it's $$O(1)$$ to add an element to the set[^1]. Adding all elements of `nums` to a set will therefore be $$O(n)$$ time total. Sets can only contain one copy of an element; attempting to insert a duplicate element into the set will not modify the set.

This solution creates a set from `nums`, then checks if the length of the set and the length of `nums` are the same. Since duplicate elements map to the same single element in the set, there are duplicates iff the lengths are different. 

This solution is $$O(n)$$ memory. If you want $$O(1)$$ memory, you can sort the elements and iterate through the array; duplicates will always be adjacent. This is $$O(n \log n)$$ time, which is usually a worse solution - nowadays, memory is cheaper than time.

[^0]: [Python sets are unordered.](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/datastructures.html#sets). If you wanted an ordered set for something, one workaround is to insert keys into a dictionary without filling in corresponding values. 

[^1]: If you want to be super picky, it's a little more complicated than this if you start considering hash collisions. For practical purposes it's $$O(1)$$; well-impelemented hash operations shouldn't noticeably scale with input size except with deliberately engineered adversarial examples.
