---
title: "Blind 75.14 - Missing Number"
header:
  teaser: "/assets/images/blind.png"
  og_image: "/assets/images/blind.png"
categories: 
  - Blind 75
tags:
  - blind 75
  - software
---

Missing number.

## Problem description

[Taken directly from LeetCode.](https://leetcode.com/problems/missing-number/)

Given an array `nums` containing `n` distinct numbers in the range `[0, n]`, return _the only number in the range that is missing from the array._

**Example 1:**

**Input:** nums = \[3,0,1\] \
**Output:** 2 \
**Explanation:** n = 3 since there are 3 numbers, so all numbers are in the range \[0,3\]. 2 is the missing number in the range since it does not appear in nums.

**Example 2:**

**Input:** nums = \[0,1\] \
**Output:** 2 \
**Explanation:** n = 2 since there are 2 numbers, so all numbers are in the range \[0,2\]. 2 is the missing number in the range since it does not appear in nums.

**Example 3:**

**Input:** nums = \[9,6,4,2,3,5,7,0,1\] \
**Output:** 8 \
**Explanation:** n = 9 since there are 9 numbers, so all numbers are in the range \[0,9\]. 8 is the missing number in the range since it does not appear in nums.

**Constraints:**

*   `n == nums.length`
*   `1 <= n <= 104`
*   `0 <= nums[i] <= n`
*   All the numbers of `nums` are **unique**.

**Follow up:** Could you implement a solution using only `O(1)` extra space complexity and `O(n)` runtime complexity?

## Solution type

Bit operations, plus some math if you want.

## Solution

XOR is the key. Think of `a ^ b` as flipping switch `a` if `b = 1`: if `a = 0, b = 1`, then `a ^ b = 1`, the complement of 0. If `a = 1, b = 1`, then `a ^ b = 0` and again you have this flip. If `b = 0`, then nothing changes in the output.

with 32-bit wide inputs, we can just think of this as flipping 32 switches. Two questions arise: what would be the state of the switches if we XOR'd all numbers from 0 up to `n`, and what would be the state of the switches if we XOR'd all numbers in `nums`? We can answer this question by just doing all those XOR operations in a loop and accumulating the result. If we XOR the two results, then that will give us the number we XOR'd by in the former but not the latter. 

Here's a little more proof on the math: any number XOR'd by itself is 0. If `a` is the result of XOR'ing all numbers from 0 to `n` and `b` is the result of XOR'ing all numbers from 0 to `n` *except* one of those numbers, then we can rearrange the XOR operations so that all factors in `a` and `b` cancel each other out except for the one factor in `a` that does not have a twin in `b`. Therefore, `a ^ b` returns this one untwinned number.

```c++
int missingNumber(vector<int>& nums) {
    int xor_n = 0, xor_nums = 0;
    for (int i = 0; i < nums.size(); ++i) {
        xor_n ^= i;
        xor_nums ^= nums[i];
    }
    xor_n ^= nums.size();

    return xor_n ^ xor_nums;
}
```
